Hello and welcome to the Bigger Picture podcast.
Today I have with me Helen Joyce, a journalist and the author of Trans, When Ideology Meets
Reality.
Helen, welcome to the show.
Thanks for having me on.
It's a pleasure to have you here.
This is a big topic and one that I've been thinking about quite a bit over the past
years so it's great to get a chance to finally talk about it on the show and with someone
who has done such amazing work uncovering the reality behind the trans movement and
its ideology.
And just as a comment, you know, I talk quite a bit about sex differences here on the podcast
mostly in the context of personal development and relationships and evolution behind these
differences because as far as I can tell, men and women are quite different in important
and somewhat predictable ways.
And I feel that the more we know about these differences, the better our lives will be
and the better our relationships will be.
But I haven't officially entered the trans debate so I'm looking forward to this.
Oh well, good luck.
Oh yes, exactly.
Good luck to us.
Here be dragons.
I'm ready for it.
So in your book, you make the distinction between biological sex and gender identity.
And people listening might be thinking, what's the harm in letting people identify however
they please?
Live and let live.
And I understand how that would appeal to our internalized liberalism but you have so
beautifully shown that there are serious consequences when we try to bend reality and pretend that
someone's gender identity equals their biological sex.
So tell us Helen, why is a trans woman not in fact a woman?
Right, big question.
The whole question really isn't it?
And the terminology is incredibly confusing and I think that's deliberate but it's whether
or not it's deliberate, it's true.
So just for your listeners, a trans woman is a man who identifies as a woman.
About a quarter of people tend to think it's the other way round.
They think it's a woman who identifies as a man.
So when they hear trans women are women, they think to themselves of course trans women
are women because your identity doesn't change what you actually are.
But the claim is the reverse that a man can become a woman by saying he's a woman.
So that's the first thing.
And the second thing is it's right that we start from this liberal point of view.
I mean, I think all well-meaning people do.
We start with this position that other people have the right to feel how they like, identify
how they like, do what they like as long as it doesn't hurt other people.
And the thing about gender self-id, which is the short way of saying you are who you
say you are when it comes to which category you fall into, man or woman, is that it does
affect other people.
People often have this false analogy in their mind with, for example, gay rights.
And they think a gay person can tell you that they're gay and you wouldn't say no, you're
not, you're straight or well-proved to me that you're gay.
And there's two reasons for that.
One is because there is actually an objective reality behind being gay, like in the end
it does mean that you're going to fancy and end up with people who are the same sex as
you.
But the other reason is that apart from that person, who does it really affect?
It doesn't affect me as a straight woman in terms of my own relationships, that I have
one straight son and one gay son.
They'll end up with whoever they end up with.
And I fully expect that at some point I will welcome a daughter-in-law and a son-in-law
into my life, although I only have two boys.
So that's fine.
But this is different because in lots of places we have single-sex spaces and a person of
the wrong sex in a single-sex space, it's a bit like, I don't know what the American
equivalent is, I don't know, I know you don't call petrol, I think you call petrol gasoline.
But anyway, the two types of fuel for your car, we call them petrol and diesel, right?
And if you put petrol in a diesel engine, even a tiny bit of it, you destroy the whole tank
of petrol and you're going to have to go and get your car engine cleaned out.
And same the other way round.
And the person of the wrong sex in a single-sex space is like that.
They break the single-sex space, just one of them.
So if one man claims that he identifies as a woman and uses that claim to go into a space
that's meant only for women, it's like a tiny little bit of petrol in a diesel engine.
You've destroyed the whole thing.
And that's not to say that men are bad and women are good or vice versa, it's the same
as there are two types of fuel and they're both fine, it just depends which engine you have.
So the statement that a man can become a woman by saying he's a woman, if he's just
saying it at home himself in his own mind, who cares?
But actually, he's saying something that wrecks things for half of the population,
because he's saying something that would entitle him to come into spaces that he ruins by his
presence in the same way that petrol would ruin a diesel engine.
I mean, it's a sort of homely analogy, but I hope people see what I mean because I'm
not saying that men are bad.
People think you're saying, oh, this person's bad, they're a rapist, they're perverted.
I don't say any of those things.
They're perfectly nice people.
They're just not in the right place.
So to sum all of that up, a person's identity claim can't override the physical reality
when it comes to other people's needs and perceptions and so on.
And I skimmed right past there, what's the difference between sex and gender?
So sex is that those two of them were mammals, we evolved.
Like every other mammal in the world, we only come in two types, male and female,
and it's not possible to change which one you are.
The question of which one you are is an absolutely solely physical one.
It's to do which type of body, with which type of body you have.
Again, not one better than the other.
There just are two, and that's the way it is.
Gender is this like kind of multi-meaning word that different people mean different things by,
like maybe it means your masculinity and femininity.
Maybe it means something that you feel inside yourself,
like religious people feel that they have a soul or a connection with God
or that they've had a revealed truth about something like being born again
or living after death or something like that.
You know, there are claims that matter a lot to people, but don't matter really to other people.
So to the extent that gender is a word that's even worth using,
I don't because it's just got too many different meanings.
It's very personal and not something that should be imposed on other people at all.
It's our sex that matters when it comes to other people's perceptions and needs.
I think this term, gender, understanding the history of it, can help clear this issue up.
Can you tell us a little bit about where did this term come from and what made it so popular?
Yeah, I mean, lots of different bits to that story, really.
It wasn't a word that was often used for people's sex until relatively recently,
and I really think that the main reason it got picked up was that people didn't want to say the word sex.
Americans more than Europeans, because Americans tend to be more pretty about your language than we are.
But also, it's actually an ambiguous word, sometimes sex,
in that we also say sex for sexual intercourse.
So for example, in the context of a school, it would be a very bad idea to have a questionnaire
that you handed out that said, what sex are you or just sex?
And then the kids write in, yes, please, or lots of it or something like that.
Like you're just asking for trouble if you put sex in some questionnaires.
So people tend to use the word gender when they mean sex.
And that's still the most common use of the word gender.
But the word gender is also used by feminists and has been for over half a century
to describe the sort of impositions on the two sexes.
So there are, I mean, as you said at the beginning, quite right of course,
there are on average differences between men as a group and women as a group
in terms of interests, some strengths and weaknesses in psychological profiles.
And those things have very obvious evolutionary roots.
They are, again, just, you know, on average and men and women overlap a lot.
You could call that gender if you wanted.
Or you could say that gender is the thing that's imposed on us by things like,
oh, pink as a girl, color blue as a boy, color and men are leaders,
women are handmaidens to those leaders, those sorts of things like the prison,
actually, that the two sexes get put in.
And that makes it so hard to be so-called gender non-conforming
if you end up being a boy who cries easily and likes hugging
and doesn't want to play rugby and would like to play the harp.
Or you're a girl who absolutely hates wearing bows and frilly dresses
and thinks rugby looks like a great sport for you, you know?
So that's another meaning of gender, like the sort of imposition on the two sexes.
And actually the imposition that positions men is better than women, like superior.
And then one more meaning would be what you think you are yourself.
And that's a meaning that was only really started,
and I think about the 1980s, 90s in fringe parts of academia,
the idea that what made you, like that everybody had this inner sense
of whether they were a man or a woman, which might or might not be the same
as actually the fact of them being a man or a woman.
And you could think of that as an identity.
And since then, we've only accelerated on this path towards what you might call
the identitarianism, the idea that the most important thing about us
is our self-chosen labels, whether you label yourself as being a person of color,
like which is sort of, you know, it's a factual thing,
but it's also a self-chosen label if you're a mixed race, to some extent, at least.
And whether you label yourself as being of a certain religion,
how you think about your national identity, you know,
people tend to think about things like autism or ASD now as identitarian labels,
like whether you think of yourself as a member of the ASD community,
but in particular, your gender identity as another self-chosen label.
And you could think of that as a part of a very long-run shift
away from identity factors that are and have a lot of connection to other people,
things like the membership of your church,
the membership of a local community that you were born in, grew up in and would
expect to die in, your family, your larger family ties,
a workplace that you expected to stay in for decades,
a profession that you had for your entire adult life.
Those sorts of identities, as we become more fluid and mobile globally,
are taking second or even third place behind very self-chosen labels,
as I say, like things to do with mental illness or neurological differences,
as well as sexuality, gender,
maybe attachment to some slightly fringe ideas that you can find online about religion,
like not just mainstream church that you actually go to every week and that you work in,
but, you know, slightly cultish on occasion, ideas.
Right, right. So there's a few problems here that I'm hearing.
One of them is this very subjective sense of identity,
the fact that we think that our identity has to do only with our internal subjective feeling.
And in reality, we are very social animals, we cannot exist without others,
and our identity needs to somewhat be negotiated with our tribe and with other people.
So this shift into the entirely subjective, I find problematic.
And the second thing that I'm hearing is there is this paradox
with gender and what people call gender stereotypes and gender roles.
On the one hand, we're hearing that gender is completely fluid, right?
There are no two genders we can identify however we want,
you know, on a whim, depending on the day. But trans people really try to emulate
the gender stereotype of their choosing. They are trying to
be and embody that gender stereotype. So there's this contradiction in the ideology itself.
And I'll just mention, I love that you added in your book a Jungian friend that you have,
a Jungian therapist, where she says that it is very problematic to turn the abstract
into concrete. And yes, there are elements of our personalities that we might find masculine
or we might find feminine. As you have mentioned in other interviews,
you have a PhD in mathematics, which is something that might be considered
typically masculine. I know that I am a pretty disagreeable person, which is also a masculine
trait. But that doesn't affect my gender in the slightest. So tell us a little bit about this
paradox around gender and stereotypes. Yeah, I mean, this whole topic is filled with
contradictions. I mean, for example, you're told that gender is fluid, and that there is no
characteristic that you can point to that tells you what somebody's gender is,
except that they just told it to you. And this is related, by the way, to a sort of
post truth ideology where everyone creates their own truths. Yes. And anything that is imposed on
you is seen as an imposition, like a bad thing. But I mean, lots of things are just irreducibly
true. I mean, I would love to be immortal. But the reality of human life is that I am going to die.
I think a lot of this is actually a sort of childish, almost toddlerish
tantrum against the fact that there are many things that are given and that we can't change.
Well said. Yeah. So that's not good for any of us.
Lisa Marchano is the name of the therapist you're thinking about. She's a Jungian psychotherapist
who's extremely knowledgeable about gender and gender identity. And she said to me when I talked
to her, she's she's a wonderful woman. And, you know, I really highly recommend people looking into
her work, generally, but also specifically on gender. She said to me that when she found out
about this first, like a lot of people, it was around 2015. And she noticed it with friends
saying, you know, such and such is coming out as trans. And like a lot of us, she thought,
Oh, you know, this is this is lovely. This is wonderful. These kids are playing with something.
And she also, if I remember correctly, she has studied history and trained as a social worker
in her past. So she has three really relevant bits of information here. So one is, you know,
something about psychic contagions, because that's a Jungian concept, but also it's something
that's happened through the history of medicine. Two, she's quite alert to the fact that children
are very suggestible and need grown ups to set boundaries to help them to be safe and to understand
the world and to navigate the path to adulthood. And three, she's a Jungian. So she thinks a lot
about the power of the symbolic and how important symbols can be as the first part of the furniture
of our mind. So she thought that when, and in particular, so a young also talked about the
animus and the animal, which are like male and the female animating soul type concepts,
it's not something I've thought about much in my own life or that I would regard as particularly
helpful. But for her, it's a way of thinking about dark and light, masculine and feminine,
you know, as constant balancing things that play and shift. And in any one person,
you're going to have bits of both and maybe more of one than the other. But you could also,
in therapy, think in a very playful way about how you as a woman might think about your masculine
side or, you know, vice versa and that that might change over time. And so she thought that's what
these kids were doing. She thought, Oh, how lovely they're playing. And then she found out they were
getting mastectomies. And to her, that was immediately, Oh, you're concrete concretizing
the symbolic. And Jung understood that in a very profound way to be extremely dangerous,
that somebody would would take these playful symbolic concepts that, you know, are so useful
when you're thinking about growing as a human being, and then draw them on your body in the same way
that, you know, an anorexic turns self hatred or fear of adulthood, or a desire to take a
blessed space in the world or something on their bodies that acted out there. That's what these
kids are doing. They're acting something out on their bodies. And so she flipped in a second when
she said that when she heard that, where it's for most of us, it takes a bit longer, I think,
to think through it. But so then you've got this person who is expressing something very real to
them, which is that in some sense, they don't feel like their own sex. Talk about what those
feelings might be where their origin is how they would differ between men and women, girls and boys.
But anyway, you've got a person who is saying to you, I'm not really a girl or I'm not really a boy,
aren't the opposite sex or identity sex. This is a very meaningful statement. It's not a true
statement in the concrete world where our mammalian bodies live. But it may be a true
psychological statement that you then need to unpack. And that distinction between the two is
the problem. But you've also got a person who is trying to express that to everybody else. And
this this comes to your stereotypes question. Like, first of all, the stereotype may be the
reason why I've got this idea in their heads, if they feel they aren't living up to a stereotype
that they think is very important, like a boy thinks he's not going to be manly enough,
or a girl thinks that, you know, girls are giggling creatures, you know, like wearing push-up
bras and having nape extensions and ironing their waist length hair every morning. And, you know,
actually, is the sort of person that you see in the really grotesque porn that's very common
in schools now, like boys show girls porn, you know, as a way of bullying them, for example.
Oh, God. So if you're a girl who thinks that you can't live up to the feminine stereotype,
which is an impossible stereotype, incredibly thin with big tits,
you know, very virginal, but at the same time puts out all of those things that we've always
known about femininity, how impossible it is, then you think you must be masculine, but now
you're going to have to try and show that to other people. Now, an actual boy doesn't have to act
very masculine to show people that he's a boy, because everyone can see he's a boy. But a girl
who wants other people to think that she's a boy is going to have to act in stereotypically
masculine ways, otherwise they just won't know what she's going on about, and vice versa.
So, I mean, I'm a middle-aged woman and, you know, feminine, am I masculine? At this point,
I don't care. As long as I get my HRT, I'm happy, you know? But I do some feminine things,
like I don't bother cutting my hair. I grow it long. I'm wearing a floral top.
I'm a mother. That's a pretty feminine thing to be, I suppose, as you say, other PhD in
mathematics. But anyway, I don't have to do anything, because the fact that my face was
shaped by estrogen, and my body was shaped by estrogen, do it all for me. I could go out in
a paper bag and people would know that I'm a one. But if I had been along the male developmental
pathway, nobody would know that I thought I was a woman. So, you're going to have to wear the signs,
outward signs of being a woman, to try to override the fact that you're just not, and that people
can see that. And this leads people to very stereotyped self-presentation and performance.
And then the final thing, which I hope we do get to talk on in more detail, is that sometimes the
stereotype is the appeal. Like a lot of the middle-aged men who identify as women, they get
turned on by acting feminine stereotypes. Yeah, so we will get into that. That is an interesting
one. Absolutely. Absolutely. So this, I think, does help clarify why they are so married to the
stereotype. And just as an aside, I do very much like Carl Jung in his thinking. And I don't buy
the fact that gender stereotypes are stereotypes. I think they're archetypes. I think they're
evolved just like estrogen evolved females and testosterone evolved males. And the fact that
certain things we perceive automatically, it's almost like a heuristic as masculine or feminine,
I think that's also evolved. And obviously, there are cultural flavors and, you know, one
culture might consider dancing as very feminine. And another culture only men do that. But still,
there are certain things that, for instance, thinking that nurturing is something feminine.
That is not made up. And that is not a patriarchal lie. That is because women bear children and they
breastfeed. And they have this built in maternal instinct. So also changing some of the language
around stereotypes, we do have a lot of freedom in how we express our roles today, which I think is
amazing. But understanding what femininity and masculinity is in our psyches, these built in
features, I think is also important because pretending like nothing is feminine, nothing is
masculine, we can be whatever we want. And then playing out the stereotypes, I think gets us into
such confusion. And it's just not helpful. If I could come back on that a bit, I agree with
everything you said. And that is why I don't count myself as what some, in particular, some radical
feminists. So for listeners, radical in radical feminist does not mean extreme. It means going
back to the root. Radical is a word that comes from root. So it's a specific school of feminism.
And I don't count myself as a member of that because radical feminists are also gender abolitionists.
They believe that in a world where women weren't oppressed, there would be no gender stereotypes
or of any sort. I completely agree with you that many things that we call stereotypes are archetypes
and that these are things that clearly evolved. Obviously, women are going to be more interested
in babies than men. This just like how could that not be? Evolution does not leave. There's a famous
joke about an economist as somebody who would walk past a dollar bill left on the sidewalk and not
pick it up. And if you asked him why, he'd say, you know, no dollar bills get left on sidewalks,
someone must already have picked it up. So evolution is like that. Evolution doesn't leave
dollar bills on sidewalks. Anyway, what I would say, though, is that what is harmful and very
destructive about gender and not are given is hierarchy in it. And this is a point that was
made to me beautifully some years ago by Jane Clare Jones, who's a philosopher here in the UK.
And she was the person who showed me that in a lot of these things, the bad isn't in difference.
The bad is in turning that difference first into a binary. So it's very extreme rather than thinking
that people are mixtures and they vary and it's overlapping, and then saying that one is better
than the other. So if you think of masculine and feminine and you think of words to pair with that,
you will hear that masculine is light and feminine is dark. Masculine is the sun, feminine is the
moon. Masculine is Yin, feminine is Yang. And in every case, the masculine is the animation force,
the active force, and feminine is the passive force. And those linked binaries need to be
unpicked if women are to be full human beings. It doesn't mean that we can't be feminine,
but to the extent that feminine means being object rather than subject,
and being passive rather than active, being the servant rather than the master,
and being the follower rather than the leader, you know, women want to do all of those things too.
We want to live full and actualized lives too. While we're more interested in babies,
while we speak more maybe, while we're better communicators, maybe while we don't have such
good 3D vision, you know, why we probably don't make good firefighters in the main but are better
nurses in the main than men, you know. So, because we've done this stupid thing of over exaggerating
what masculine and feminine are, lying to ourselves about the fact that we have put a value judgment
on how the two of them relate to each other, and then pretending that it's all stereotyped
and none of it is real, we haven't even started the work of unpicking any of this that we could have done.
Absolutely, absolutely. I think that is so beautifully said, because it really is that
superiority and inferiority complex, right, the fact that we perceive masculinity as positive,
and the fact that feminists, their solution to that was to become more like men instead of
raising the value of feminine virtues and things like, you know, raising children or, you know,
being nurturing of valuing that, as you said, there are value judgments here, and yes, we have
evolved in a somewhat patriarchal world, but unpicking these gender archetypes doesn't mean
that we need to abolish gender. So, I really, really loved how you put that. So, let's talk a
little bit about gender dysphoria. What has the research shown about kids who have gender dysphoria
and were left alone? So, gender dysphoria, the word dysphoria just means discomfort or misery.
So, it's a discomfort or misery with either the fact of which sex you are or the stacks of the
sexed body that you have. And the diagnostic tools have changed over time and the labels have changed,
but basically, it's a boy who's deeply unhappy in more than just a passing sense, the fact that he's
a boy, perhaps he hates his penis, perhaps he hates the role that he's supposed to play as a boy,
whatever, you know, and the same for girl, like the reverse. So, this is something that,
to some extent, probably, through recent history, most girls are felt because most girls find
puberty really very difficult. Bleeding is starting to bleed as tough when you have your period.
Breasts are the most visible outer remarker of being an adult woman, and as soon as your
breasts start to develop, which is usually when you're only in your early teens,
that's when you start to get catcalled and men give you unwanted attention. So, you could say
that gender dysphoria is an incredibly natural thing, at mild to moderate. And, you know, lots
of boys, like, if you're going to grow 18 inches in about half a second and your voice breaks and
you become very, very spotty, that's also deeply depressing. So, puberty is perhaps a time that
a lot of people feel some of the element of gender dysphoria. But what you didn't ever really see
until very recently was significant numbers of younger kids strongly expressing that they
didn't want to be their sex, or teenagers who said, much more than just, you know,
it's so unfair that I have to bleed, or why do I have to stay at home while the boys get
up to go out and play? Like, why do I have to help with housework? You know, to go beyond that into
saying, I feel like I'm a member of the opposite sex, I was meant to be a member of the opposite
sex, I really am a member of the opposite sex. That's not an idea that spontaneously occurs to
many people. So, at that long preamble, it has occurred to some children in history. And there
are, I think, 13 studies that I know all before the big change that happened in the last decade or
so, which will come to that have looked at those kids. And they're in different countries, some
of them are boys only, some of them mixed sex, some of them are rather small. All of them show
that those kids outgrow their gender dysphoria if you don't concretize it. So if the family are
kind to the child, try to understand what it is the kid is saying when they say, I'm not really
a boy or I'm not really a girl, give them time, don't lie to them about their bodies, don't lie to
other people about what sex they are, they grow out of it. And interestingly, a very large share
of them turn out to be gay. So the fixed understanding by, say, 2010, among those who knew
the research was that little children who expressed spontaneously the idea that they were meant to
be members of the opposite sex in whatever language they used were highly likely to grow up to be gay,
but would also grow out of their gender dysphoria. And this is connected with an idea we all used
to know, which is that gay people are by far the most gender nonconforming people. And that gender
nonconformity often comes way before puberty. So before the gay person knows they're going to be
gay, before they feel any, you know, feelings of sexual attraction, they are unusual, they are
different, you can spot these little fey boys sometimes, and these incredibly rough and tumble
girls. Of course, some of them grow up to be straight, but just the odds chain when a kid is
like that. Right, right. So that's what we knew in about 2010. And there have been some studies
since that have confirmed that. But what has happened since then, two things. One is that we
are creating gender dysphoria. And the other is taking that gender dysphoria to mean that you
are trans and that you should do quite extreme things in terms of your self presentation and
medical treatment. So by telling people that if you feel that if you don't identify with
the most extreme and rigid and un-nuanced description of what it is to be a boy or a girl,
then you probably aren't a boy or a girl. And that's basically what's being taught right across
the Anglosphere and increasing numbers of non-English speaking European countries as well.
That they're literally telling girls and boys in school from quite little that it's possible
to look like a boy but really be a girl or vice versa, and that there are people who have a gender
identity that doesn't match their body. How are you going to know what your gender identity is
when you self-examine and you do so by reference to just incredibly regressive stereotypes? So,
I mean, I'm not talking about, you know, it's unsurprising that girls like babies more than
boys do. I'm talking about girls like cooking and pink and knitting and shopping and gossiping
and boys like trucks and rugby and like they literally write these lists down and they tell
children to look at them and self-examine. So that Zinnikid looks and thinks, oh, you know,
I don't really fit in that and actually it sounds a bit shit. Maybe I'm non-binary or I like the
look of the other lists better or whatever. And then they're told that makes them trans.
And so now you've got a kid who's thinking about something that a child wasn't thinking about in
previous eras. Like, they just weren't encouraged to think about it and encouraging people to
ruminate about something creates a chain in how they think and how they feel. It's a feedback loop.
And over time, you know, pretty much anyone can convince themselves that they're gender
dysphoric if they give it a really good go. And then the next thing that you're told is you're
given a cultural meaning for what it is to be trans that says you must declare your pronouns.
Anyone who won't use your pronoun hates you and wants you dead. I mean, imagine a more
wicked thing to tell a child than that anyone who slips up and looks at an obvious girl and
forgets that that girl calls herself a boy, that that person is hateful and wants them dead.
And then that child gets paranoid about it. They ruminate. They feel afraid. They close in.
They go into their bubble of people who agree with this incredibly extreme ideology.
And then they may self-medicate or they may seek medication or they go and see a gender
affirmative therapist who tells them this is the right interpretation. And if they're very unlucky,
they end up on drugs and that they can't be undone. You know, what you take changes your
body permanently. And maybe even on the way to surgery, whereas in a culture that understood
gender nonconformity, something wrong with it, gender nonconforming, some people are a lot
gender nonconforming. That's fine. We can accommodate all sorts here. You know, what do you mean when
you say you're really a girl? Then, you know, Jimmy, do you mean you want to go to ballet because
you can go to ballet? You know, that sort of approach. Yeah, in that culture, Jimmy would just
have gone to ballet. It would have been fine. And he might have grown up gay. Or he might have
given up ballet. Who knows? In our culture, Jimmy is unfortunately being pushed down a much more
dangerous and harmful path. And so it's hard to say what the research shows as something that
it would show now because the research dates from a time that we weren't creating gender dysphoria
and we weren't putting children on this pathway. Now that we are creating gender dysphoria and we
are putting children on this pathway, we're probably creating a lot of children who will grow
up to be adults who continue just to identify as trans and we don't know what happens next.
Will they be happy for the rest of their lives with these changes? Will they live a happier life
for spending their whole lives trying to tell everybody else they're not really the sex they
clearly are? How will they feel about the fact that if they've undergone these physical, these
hormonal and surgical changes, they'll be sterile and probably an orgasmic as well? You know, it's a
huge uncontrolled, not even experiment because we're not tracking the outcomes. Right, right.
I want to zoom in here because I think it's so important for people to understand
what actually goes on in these gender clinics. When we talk about gender affirmation,
I just want people to understand that that is the accepted policy today. If you're in a progressive
state in America, I know in the UK and in Ireland, this is very much the case in many places,
gender affirmation is the way to go. And I've heard this very cruel phrase that is being
thrown at parents. Would you rather have a trans child or a dead child? And I cannot think of
anything more cruel to say to a parent who is confused once their child to be happy
sees that their child is suffering and is seeking the advice of a clinician, of someone who is
certified and has worked and researched this field. And what they are being fed is a very,
very dangerous ideology that distorts reality. It's a collective social delusion. And the
consequences, the physical consequences are dire. And I recently had a conversation
talking about these problems. What happens? What do you do when you have a child,
four years old, five years old, who's gender nonconforming? I think understanding that we
live in a very liberal world and if you want to go to ballet, Jimmy, go to ballet. I love that.
I was in karate and kung fu classes for years because I could not stand the girls in ballet
class. And no gender dysphoria here, but I liked rough and tumble play with the boys.
And there was nothing wrong with that. And I think that this idea that we are telling children
that they can change their sex is wrong. It is false because what they really can do
is they can sterilize themselves. They can turn themselves into asexual beings. If you
take puberty blockers, your reproductive system isn't going to develop and even your sexual desire
isn't going to develop. A lot of these people are asexual, have experienced sexual dysfunction
and these surgeries are, I can't find another word other than they create a disabled person.
They have a high risk of infection, of complications. You need to take hormones for the rest of your
life. You don't actually change into the other sex. You undergo this genital mutilation,
this really awful process. So tell us a little bit about what happens in these gender clinics.
I mean, everything you say is true. And as you were saying, as I was thinking about little Jimmy
and him saying that he wants to go to ballet, and it comes back to the point I made earlier
about the hierarchy between masculine and feminine, because you were doing a high status
thing as a little girl doing karate. You were rejecting the low status thing, namely the girl
thing, whereas a boy who wants to do ballet is very counter cultural. So that's a much harder
task for parents to find space for a little Jimmy who wants to do ballet without him starting to
internalize the fact he's not a real boy, that the other boys are going to mock him. They're
going to say that's a girl thing to do, you're a girly, you're a sissy, you know, all of those things.
And I mean, it depends where you are. You know, if you're in a liberal city, if you live in Brighton
or New York, you probably, you know, there's space for that kid, but you're going to have to make
that space for them as a parent. And that's a really important thing to do. And if you think
we can't do it, then ask yourself what homophobia you are still harboring, because we all know
that little Jimmy who wants to do ballet is more likely to grow up gay, and people who don't want
them to do ballet, because they know that they wrongly think that they can change Jimmy's or
suppress Jimmy's future sexual orientation by forcing Jimmy to go and do some much more manly
things instead. All they can do is make Jimmy very unhappy. Okay, right. So so that's a harder task,
find a holding space for those useful little fey, little special boys may grow up to be
straight and fabulous. And that's fine. But let's all face it, they're more likely to be gay.
Right. So what happens when you go to a gender affirming clinic, which in more and more countries
is the only sort of way that a therapist is allowed to practice because of laws against
they call conversion therapy, is that as soon as a child says, I understand myself to be trans in
any form of words you might imagine, I feel on gender queer, I feel on gender fluid, I think I'm
non binary, I know that I was really meant to be a boy, any of those words, all they hear is,
you're right. It's back to this thin identity that is just so created and self stated, rather
than being something that's actually about the connection that you have with other people.
And then that is affirmed, you know, a good therapist affirms the situation that their
client feels themselves to be in affirms their feelings by saying, I can I hear that you can
feel like that you're feeling that I hear this is important to you, let's unpack it.
Gender affirmation is no, you really are a boy. That's right. You know, a girl who says she's a
boy really is a boy. No questioning. And then that just sort of pushes the child down a certain
pathway. And anyone who disagrees with them, including the parents is positioned as somebody
who hates that child wants that child dead. And I've heard too many stories to repeat now about
therapists meeting a child for the first time and saying to that child in front of the parents,
you know, yes, you are what you say you are and anyone who disagrees with you and you need
puberty blockers or else you'll kill yourself, like telling the children, coaching them in
suicide, this really is happen. And so instead of helping, they're harming. I mean, I would not
under any circumstances bring a child that I've had anything to do with it anywhere near any of
these people, because they will only make it worse, which of course leaves you on your own.
And on your own against a culture that is telling your child lies in school curricula,
in reading materials, online, in government edicts. So you're really on your own. I think
more than parents have ever been before about trying to deal with a societally created problem.
It's worth talking a little bit about the way that this gender affirmation has become standard.
I mean, really, until 10 years ago, any reputable therapist knew very well that, you know, you don't
just affirm as in blindly say it's true to things that your clients say, you don't tell them it's
false necessarily either. It's generally a, you know, what does this mean to you? Let's talk about
it. Let's get to the root of this. And it's been by a false analogy with conversion therapy
practiced on gay people a half a century ago. So the theory used to be that being gay was
something that had gone wrong in your development was always blamed on the mother. I mean, mothers are
the universal punching bag for everything that goes wrong with children.
Since Friday, right?
And the idea was, yeah, yeah. So the idea was that the mother had been too clingy or the father
had been too absent and therefore the mother had been too present and that she had imposed
femininity on her son. And that the boy had somehow become, had flipped somehow. He was an
invert. He had gone down the wrong pathway and that you could maybe put him back on the right
pathway. And the ways in which they tried to do this, by the way, completely false, but also
the way they tried to do it was very cruel, which was that you would try to get a gay person,
so a teenager or even a little boy. I've heard it's been done in little boys who were just very
gender nonconforming. And you would try to get them to feel shame about anything that was gender
nonconforming, like you would throw out the little boys and dress up clothes, you would get the adult
to shame themselves about their feelings. If it was an adult, you might get them to what
opposite sex porn and masturbate at the same time, you would get them to watch a bit same sex
images like to be a handsome man, if it was a gay man, you're trying to convert and give them at
the same time electric shocks or give him and drugs that would make him feel sick and vomit.
And all you can do by doing this sort of thing is internalize a great deal of shame and also
make the person associate their natural feelings of desire for an older person
with revulsion. It is actually possible to suppress people, temporarily to suppress people's
natural desires. What you can do is create the desire that they don't have, you know,
all you can do is really make them very, very miserable. So that was conversion therapy and no
therapist has done it for a decade. It was recognized to be abusive. All the psychological
associations and similar worldwide put out statements apologizing for ever having suggested
that this was a good idea, saying it didn't work, saying that doing anything remotely like this
would get you struck off. The only place that anything even remotely similar still happens
is in sort of fringe religious groups. And there you might get shamed in front of other people
or prayed over or be subjected to sort of hours of haranguing. And this again is really fringe,
like really, really fringe. And anything that heads into that you might be hit or anything
that that would of course fall under and assault laws, like it will be illegal without ever having
to say you need to have a specialist law about it. But anyway, in the last few years, activists
have managed to get laws they call bans on conversion therapy past around the world. We're
fighting to try to stop one here in the UK. And what they say is conversion therapy for,
and this is the big bait and switch, sexual orientation and gender identity. Now,
if it was just sexual orientation, it would be a law banning something that basically isn't
happening. And that's annoying and bad. But anyway, you know, it's relatively minor because
it's not really happening. But gender identity, as I said, it's not this fixed thing. Most people
don't feel themselves to have to have a gender identity, they just know that they're male or
female. And people who think of themselves as having a cross gender identity, at least in childhood,
we know that tends to vanish, if you just let it alone. So there isn't a fixed thing gender
identity that you would be trying to convert somebody from the way there is a sexual orientation.
And what this plays out as is that anybody who tries to make any sort of effort to convince
somebody that they're not whatever they say they are at risks of criminal prosecution,
it depends on the law, the specific law, if they're a therapist, they might get struck off.
And they might get sued by somebody if it's even a parent in some places. I mean, there have been
parents who had children taken away from them in both Canada and in the US, for refusing to allow
the child to go on puberty blockers, because that's seen as a conversion effort. So this law is an
absolute wolf in sheep's clothing. It's an attempt to stop anybody from saying to a child, you know,
hang on, what do you actually mean when you say you're not actually a girl? And to just railroad
this child's straight through this entirely ideologically driven, non reality based model
of whatever you say you are, you are. This is so sinister, you know, putting this into a law and
taking a parent's right away from them to be a parent, to deal with their children however
they see fit. And to protect them from these ideologies, it's absolutely absurd. And I think
the problem is that most people just don't have the time to follow, you know, these policies,
these laws. And it's really important to know the facts behind this. It sounds so nice as well,
you know, it sounds so great ban conversion therapy. Yeah, I know. And then you look at
it and it's not what it says it is. Exactly, exactly. Wolf in sheep's clothing, as you said,
that's really well put. I want us to talk a little bit about the types of transgender
isms, because we like to think of it as one big category. But really, there are types and there
has been good research showing that there are types. So tell us a little bit about these categories.
Sure. So the very first people who ever had any idea that somebody could be a man but really a
woman were in about 1920s. And it was very linked to their understanding of homosexuality,
like these early researchers and going back a little bit earlier than that about 30 years earlier
than that on homosexuality, their idea of what a homosexual man was was a man with a woman's soul.
That's what they really thought that you were inside, you were really a woman.
But by about 1920s in Berlin, specifically, there were just a couple of doctors who felt
that it was possible not just to be a man with a woman's soul who wanted to sleep with men,
but that you might be a man with a woman's soul in a way that made you want to present as a woman.
So they saw it as a type of cross dressing. And if you look at the early work, their early writing
about it, they understood that it was different whether the man wanted to sleep with men or
wanted to sleep with women. So they understood right from the beginning that there were two
types of men who might think of themselves as women or want to sleep, like take the woman's
role in sex, you might call it. And that was the gay ones and the straight ones.
So those are the two types still that we think of. If you're any sort of serious sexologist who
isn't entirely had your brain eaten by identity and identity politics and queer theory, you still
understand that there are these two types of men who feel that they're women. And there's
entirely different paths to it. So for the gay men, it'll be somebody who is a really gender
nonconforming little boy. And it was established really 20 years ago by in a research paper that
looked at all the previous research about how gender dysphoria developed in children.
And what it concluded was you started with the gender nonconformity. Child didn't typically feel
gender dysphoric. Shame followed because of the way that the gender nonconformity was
responded to by the people around you. So a dad who tried to toughen you up,
and, you know, classmates bullying you and leaving you angst and calling you a sissy,
and so on, that creates enormous shame in a boy who is different. And that shame becomes
self-patriot. And then at some point the question occurs to the little boy, was I really meant to
be a girl? And that's the origin of that sort of gender dysphoria. And somebody who goes along
that classic pathway, ideally what'll happen when they hit puberty is sexual desire rears its head
and they finally understand themselves to be gay. And then, you know, this is not an easy path to
adulthood when you're shamed with who you are and you maybe live in a homophobic society.
But anyway, a load of gay men of my generation and above have had to navigate that path and they
understand themselves to be gay and they have done a lot of work on themselves to get rid of the
shame. But some haven't and some can't. And in the end they feel that they just be happier and more
natural. They present as women. And so these people typically tend to be very feminine in their
presentation and style and always have been, pass quite well often, and are quite realistic
actually. They know they're not women and they don't tend to want to impose on women. I don't think
any man belongs in women's spaces but these men because they're gay are not actually a massive
threat to women. And that's what most people think that all trans men are, like all trans-identified
men, all trans women, they think that they think that it's a gay man who's had a lot of surgery
and is really unusually, you know, feminine. But they're probably the minority who've been
seen in gender clinics over the last number of decades. The majority come in older. They're
heterosexual. They've often been married and have kids and they're often very notably not very feminine
in their self-presentation. They're quite hard charging men. Typically they've done things like
engineering, computer science. There's a lot of them in the military. And these men have something
more complicated which is that they get aroused at the idea of being a woman. So they like women,
not men, but the woman they like best is the imaginary woman that they are. And those men
have typically been cross-dressings as they were teens. It often starts by stealing your sisters
or your mother's underwear and masturbating in it. And those men often conceal the fact that that's
how they get their thrills. They get married, they have kids maybe, and then at some point their
wife finds out that their husband is wearing their dresses. And this is a big part of his life.
And often what happens is this man makes it to his forties or fifties. And by this point,
you know, he's conquered everything else. He's maybe cruising towards retirement and it's time
for the woman inside to come out and play. Right, like Caitlyn Jenner is a great example of this.
Yeah, I mean, I don't want to diagnose somebody that I don't know. But I mean,
it does look pretty typical. So if you imagine Caitlyn Jenner, you're probably imagining
the right thing. But I don't know Caitlyn Jenner and I'm not a psychological professional.
So that person is often somebody who, like, their dearest wish is to really be a woman.
And the thing that's different about this from homosexual orientation is that it requires
other people to play along. So the gay man says to me, I'm gay. And I say, no, you're not.
Like he goes, oh, yes, I am. But I don't care what you think.
If a man who says he's a woman says to me, he's a woman. And I say, no, you're not.
I'm destroying his deepest fantasy. Right. And if I say to him, no, you can't come into this
space because this space is women only. I'm stopping him from living out something that he's
been fantasizing about possibly for decades. And remember, he's a man, he's got male entitlement.
He's somebody who thinks that he gets what he wants. And this is the latest thing that he wants.
And so these men are hyper aggressive. So if you want to think about the nastiest and most
entitled, aggressive woman hating, and just horrible trans activists, and of course,
there are plenty of trans people who are not like this. But if you want to think about the
ones who cause the most problem, it's these men. And that is because the one word they will not
hear from women is. And I'll say one more thing about these men. It's that part of the fantasy
for them is that they would have been much happier if they hadn't gone through male puberty,
because they don't pass. They've, you know, they're in their 40s, they're trying to transition now,
they've got deep voices, they've got big jaws, they've big hands and feet, they're tall.
They've got the whole body of a man. It's too late to send them down the other pathway.
And it's a source of grace grief to them that they can't pass. And it's a big part of what they
fantasize about. So they project that fantasy, boys, and they think that they often sort of,
you know, retrofit their history. They'll say things to you like, I knew I was a girl right
from when I was little. And you're like, well, I mean, there wasn't any evidence at the time.
You didn't act very feminine. And you did get girl to get married and have two kids or whatever.
So but the fact that they project that on little boys and they are biggest cheerleaders for very
early medicalization of gender dysphoria kids. And they are not interested in the fact that most
of those kids will grow out of it. They want those kids put on puberty blockers before puberty
starts. They want those they want to lower the ages, kids can get cross sex hormones.
They want surgery done even before 18, because it's part of their own sexual fantasy. And they
don't care about the fact that actually the biggest group seen in gender clinics now are girls,
who aren't even part of this damn profile. And we didn't even start talking about the girls,
like we just talked about the boys. The girls, the girls is a whole other issue. And just to
give people a little context, this is new. Transgenderism has usually been seen in men
with androphilic men who are homosexual and do want to be women, but with men and the auto
gynephilia, men who are attracted almost to themselves really as women and have this fantasy,
as you said, of being women. But teenage girls being gender dysphoric is completely new. And
we we hinted at it at the beginning with this social contagion. So give us a little context.
What is happening to teenage girls today? So Abigail Shrier wrote a book that was very
specifically about these girls called Irreversible Damage. And in it, she said that she had tried
to find papers, the earliest papers, academic papers that covered gender dysphoria and teenage
girls, and she couldn't find a single one before 2010. It literally wasn't a phenomenon. There
were there was none. Almost no children were seen in gender clinics. And when they were,
it was really invariably boys or nearly invariably boys. You did see some women in gender clinics
early, but they were variably like really hyper butch lesbians who just found that they just
wanted to be taken from men, they wanted rid of their breasts, they wanted to marry a woman,
they wanted to live in first commas live like men, like they just they just didn't want anyone to
think of them as women. And often they could pass because if you testosterone is like a one-way
gait, it's like, you know, it's like they say easily in but not easily out. So the mobster in the
lobster pot, you know, testosterone testosterone is that. So someone who's gone through male
puberty is never going to pass as a woman without extensive surgery, including on their face,
and probably not even then. But a woman, even a woman who's gone through female puberty, if she
takes testosterone, she'll grow facial hair, she'll bulk up on her muscles. She may have
looser hair if she carries the gene from male patterned baldness. She's got a much better chance
of passing as a man. So that was what they used to see in gender clinics, the occasional lesbian
woman who came in and wanted testosterone and to have her breasts removed. Never saw teenage girls
and never saw gender conforming women either. So what happened? I mean, you could say the internet
happened, Tumblr happened. Teenage girls have always been the group most susceptible to social
contagion. Right, I mean, I generally am on the fence about to what extent that's something real
about teenage girls psychology or to what extent it is. The fact that female puberty is really hard
to navigate when our ideas of what a girl is are so unattainable. But it's girls who got anorexia,
anorexia much more than boys, it's girls who self harm, who cut, who do bulimia, like vomit.
It's girls now who are on TikTok, identifying as having multiple personalities. These things
just really spread through groups of girls in a way that they don't groups of boys or mixed sex
groups. And the sad fact is that since 2010, the cultural contagion among girls has been
trans identification. And what really facilitated this and made it the cultural contagion of
time is the internet and specifically internet sites where children congregate without adults.
This is unprecedented in human history, that there has been a very serious and large social
space where only children are and where there are no adults. We have let our children raise
themselves and each other in places like Tumblr and now TikTok. And children are more volatile,
less experienced, worse at weighing risks, obviously much more naive because they have much
less life experience. And if you leave them in places where there's nobody older and more
experienced and willing to say no, they really spiral off into oddities. And so you started
to see around by 2013 to 2015 on Tumblr, these questionnaires about, you know, identify your
gender and it would be like, it was like, it was like, bloody Tamagotchi or Pokemon, you know,
like, got to catch them all lists, random, you know, unicorn gender, and very febrile.
And there were no adults. So I think it was Lisa Littman, who is the woman who
coined the phrase rapid onset gender dysphoria for these girls. She found out about it the
way that many people did by friends telling her about trans issues or seeing things on Facebook.
And at first she thought like everybody else, you know, how lovely they must have been accepted.
And then she had a training, a background in epidemiology. So she was used to thinking about
rates of things. And after she saw about the third or fourth child, all teenage girls come out in her
relatively small community, she thought this is realistic, like I'm told that the rate of
trans identification in girls is 120,000. So I'm not going to see four of them in rapid succession
in one community. So she started to look into it and she went and she looked on Tumblr and she
sent what she saw horrified her. It was children giving the worst possible advice to each other,
girls saying things like, if you think you might be trans, you really are.
And if you tell your parents and they say anything that's not affirmative, they hate you,
they want you dead, you should cut yourself off immediately. You'll find better advice here than
you find if you go to the doctor, doctors are ignorant, you know, really awfully damaging things.
And we've never ever created a space like that before. It's as if we've got the worst possible
thing that these teenage girls could do and tell each other and we put them in a gated community
where no adults come in and we've let them go for many years on this sort of thing.
Like Tumblr cracked down on sites glorifying and posts glorifying anorexia and self-harming.
They were really bad and suicide as well. But it never cracked down on the gender stuff and
spawned an entire generation's contagion and now it's all moved to Tik Tok where honestly
the amount of gender-related bullshit and if you try to say anything sense, you lose your account.
Wow. Wow. No, that is incredible. I want to give people a little glimpse into the psychology here
of the teenage girl because I find it really fascinating. First of all, in puberty, puberty
is it easy for anybody, but girls definitely have a harder time, society's expectations, period.
All of these things are difficult, but women also have a rise in eroticism during those years.
So that heightened negative emotion also sets the stage. And I heard an interview with a girl
who transitioned and then detransitioned. I forgot her name. I think it's something Cole.
She was on- Chloe Cole, that big Chloe Cole. Yes, yes, yes, yes. Wonderful, wonderful interview
with Jordan Peterson. I really recommend it. And what you find out there is that she
had fantasies of becoming a woman, a vivacious, voluptuous, Kim Kardashian type woman. And she
found later on that she she's a bit autistic. She's on the spectrum. So that also clues us
into the fact that she wasn't good at reading social cues and she didn't get along with girls
because of that. She had a harder time with with girls and feminine typical things.
And people who are autistic do tend to like things more than people. So you have this gender
non-conforming kind of till and you have these fantasies of becoming a woman and you have this
awkward stage of puberty. And God, I remember it. You know, everything grows at the wrong
pace and the wrong rate and you see all of these Victoria's Secret models and, you know,
I'm never going to be like that. And her solution then, reading Tumblr, was maybe I need to be a boy.
And I won't go into too much detail about the horrific things she underwent and the consequences
and the symptoms. But it really is devastating. And when you realize that at the heart of it was
truly a fantasy of being a woman. And her only solution was this trans ideology that she was
fed. So definitely needs more thought and more care and get your teenage girls away from social
media. And something that I should say, and I haven't heard other people say this, so maybe it's
a good time to discuss it. I think anyone who is immersed in this topic knows how dangerous
Tumblr was and that TikTok is an absolute cesspit at the moment. What you may not know is that fan
fiction websites are a big inculcator of this stuff. Interesting. So yeah, so there's two
big fanfic websites that I know about and I'm just really interested in them. There are a window into
the mind of teenage girls and young women. Others thought we don't have anywhere else,
because the way they work is they're unmediated. As long as you don't make copyright claims,
pretty much anything goes. And there's literally millions of stories on the two big ones,
Archive of Our Own and fanfiction.net. There are other ones as well. But literally millions,
I think there's more than 10 million on Archive of Our Own. And they tend to start from a story
that pre-exists, although there are some that are original. Harry Potter is very, very popular,
because Harry Potter was established at the right stage. The kids who grew up with Harry Potter
arrived at the right age to want to write fanfic. And you start by saying to yourself,
like, what happened next? What happened after Voldemort was defeated? And there's, I think,
more than a million stories that follow on from Harry Potter just alone, but there's thousands
of fandoms. Anyway, so these are not edited and they are not gate kept in the way that, say,
erotic fiction or romance fiction or adventure fiction or anything young adult is. Like,
somebody has to publish that stuff. This stuff is just by girls, for girls, or young women.
And some of it's extremely good. But you can study it because you can sort things and you can
search by tags. And I've done a fair bit of that. I wrote an article about it just more than five
years ago and I went back to it to see what had changed. Very much more porny was one of the
big ones. Porn related tags like slapping, choking, spitting, anal, gang bang, those things had
really become much more common. So there's a horrible feedback loop between the porn, the
boys watch and the erotic stuff that girls write. But there's a lot of what's called slash fiction
there. So the slash is the punctuation sign. And it goes back decades to the fan fiction that was
written before the internet and published in fanzines about Star Trek. And it started with
being women writing about Captain Kirk and Spock getting together. And so it was Kirk slash Spock,
K slash S, just slash. So slash fiction is any fan fiction that is written about two
characters who in the original are heterosexual men getting it together. And this I think is the
female equivalent of men watching so-called lesbian porn. And so lesbian porn isn't about
lesbians. It's about the sort of woman who appeals to men, but there's two of them. And men will
commonly say, well, you know, you get rid of it, I don't like watching, which is the man, I don't
like seeing men, they're getting in the way, they're ruining my view. Two women are better than one,
you know, those sorts of things. So why do women like slash? I don't, by the way, myself. I find
it incredibly irritating, but lots and lots of women do. And they write stories. So when I was
writing about this, I think in 2017 or 18, the most popular pairing in the Harry fiction in Harry
Potter category on Archive of Our Own was Draco and Harry getting together. I know it's now,
I think that's second now. And the most common is Hermione and Harry. So that's overtakenness.
But anyway, so girls write a lot of fiction that gets two boys together. But then you look at what
they write. And yes, they are using porn tropes. And, you know, they learn from each other. And so
you know, things that are seen in gay porn do creep in. But you as you read it, if you do look at
it, they don't read like men. These men don't read like men and they don't read like gay men either.
And if you ask a gay man to read it, he thinks it's hysterical. These men are kind of womanly.
And the best way I can describe them is that they're like a Korean boy band.
So they're kind of huge and they and they hold hands and they talk about their feelings and
they may have sex that's written in a lot of detail. But they're kind of girls. And I genuinely
think that these bloody sites are selling girls an idea of what it is to be a gay boy that they
really like to look all. Because it used to be that it was only the very gender nonconforming
girls who were going, you know, going to grow up lesbian. They were the ones who transitioned.
And I mean, that's bad enough. But you kind of see where they're coming from. Like it's the
wrong solution, but you see what they're saying. But now it's these very feminine girls. And like
how what is a feminine girl thinks she's good. And she's so she wants to be a gay boy. And I
mean, I said, I have a gay son. Like, this is not this is a non-starter gay men aren't interested
in women. They really aren't even in women who have taken testosterone. But they're imagining
themselves to be this sort of Korean boy band aesthetic. And so they're, I don't know, it's
very strange. It's like a self coaching into a weird, cultish belief. And lots of girls are
doing this. It's really a collective delusion, what it sounds like. It's inverting reality completely
and allowing these girls to entertain, you know, the reality of, oh, I can I can be a boy and have
that romance that I really want. Yeah, just be this, yeah, and be this like holding hands type
of boy. And I'm not saying that gay boys don't hold hands, but you do know what I mean. If you
picture those Korean boy band boys, there's an expression in French that gets used in English
in crimes, which is fully other, which is like a madness of two. And it's crimes that are committed
by partners that you think would probably not be committed by only one of them. They egg each other
on and they end up committing even a murder together. So I think whatever the collective
equivalent of fully other is, this is a madness that gets created by large numbers. And again,
it's this unmediated space where there aren't adults, there isn't reality, there's no gay keeping.
And in some ways that's brilliant, it's super creative, like there's incredibly brilliant
ideas on these sites. You know, you could lose yourself there for years if you wanted,
but one of the things that happens there is that significant numbers of girls
develop gender dysphoria, create an idea of what it would be to be a gay boy or this
they sweet kind of girly variety, and then catastrophically take steps that can't be
undone. It doesn't end up just being a phase, like being a goth would have been a phase,
you know, like this was just got 2.0, I wouldn't care.
Right, right. I think they almost think that they can solve the problems that they're facing
as girls as developing women and get to enjoy, you know, all the good parts in this illusion.
Incredible, incredible. I've never heard of that. And, you know, I do, I know about kind
of fan fiction and fantasy from Euphoria, the TV show, there's one character who's like really
heavily into that kind of erotica, but I have not heard about this like weird boy on boy,
but imagined in a girl's mind kind of romance stories. Incredible.
Oh, my jaw dropped when I heard about it first. Like, I actually, I was, why did I hear about this?
I can't actually remember where I heard about it first. I had to go off and look it up.
And I actually sat there, I could feel my mouth go, what? But you know,
and when I wrote this article, like I looked into it, you know, there's been some scholarly work
done on early slash fiction. And I talked to a woman who had written a short book on Kirk slash
Spock. And she was really interesting talking to her about it. And when she decided she wanted
to research it, she reached out to a famous evolutionary psychologist who was retired.
And she quoted from his letter and replied to her in the foreword to her book.
And he said the same thing. He said he got her letter. She wrote what this was. She said that
I want to do some research on this, you know, would you consider supervising, I think was a
master's degree on it or something. And he said he sat there, he said my jaw dropped,
and I had to rewrite reread what she had written several times to make sure that I hadn't misunderstood
it. So if you're not one of the people who finds like, I promise you some of your listeners right
now are thinking, Oh, that sounds nice. And they haven't heard about it before, but they're going
to go and look. So they're all whatever floats your boat, whatever floats your boat. But these girls
madness of large numbers. And crazy, crazy, crazy. I again, keep your teenage daughters away from
social media the best you can have them rooted in reality, in real friendships and relationships.
I think that's a good course. I do want us to touch upon this issue that you have spoken about
as well, which is trans rights impinging on women's rights. And we see that in these extreme cases
of women's sports and women's prisons. So tell us about what is going on.
So I always try and unpack that statement, because I ask what, you know, what are trans rights?
If by trans rights, we meet the human rights that everybody has, you know, to freedom of
belief, freedom of expression, safety, dignity, to be able to work without prejudice and so on,
absolutely trans identified people have exactly the same rights as everybody else. And so they
should, you should not be able to fire somebody or refuse to rent them or kick them out of a bar
or any of those things like that. What the trans rights are human rights. And it's meant to me.
Is that unless you go along with a trans identified person's identity, their actual sex,
you are denying their human rights. And they will often say you're denying my right to exist.
Right. So a man who identifies as a woman is like what I said at the beginning of this show,
you know, he's petrol. She's diesel. They're both lovely. They're great. When you put them in the
right tanks, fantastic. When you put them in the wrong tank, they cause a big problem.
So if a man who identifies as a woman takes that as being that he can come into women in
these spaces, he destroys women only spaces, like just that's just a logical statement.
He's a man. So he comes into all in space. It's no longer a woman only space. And that
doesn't change if he calls himself a woman, because we can't actually turn men into women.
Like he thinks of himself as a woman, but he's not. So it's a problem for all women only spaces
actually like even the ordinary ones. You have to ask yourself why we have women only spaces in
the first place. And it's always basically comfort, safety, privacy, privacy and dignity.
Most people really do feel more comfortable in awkward situations with only their own sex there.
So you've got to go and have a prostate exam or you've got to go and have your cervical smear
test called a pap smear in America. You probably want somebody of the same sex as you. If you are
a Muslim woman and you want to adjust your head covering or you want to watch, you're going to
have to do that in the presence of other women. And for orthodox Jewish women, there will also
be rules about that. And you know, as you're a rape victim, or you are very shy, or you are a
domestic abuse survivor, or you were abused as a child, you may have very strong feelings about
not wanting to be vulnerable or visible in mixed sex spaces. But just most women, like even women
with none of these special characteristics, if you're going to have to undress from the waist
down, which we do in order to just have a pee, you want only other women around. Like even if
there's a door just feels better that men are outside two doors. That's why we have single sex
spaces. And if men can say I'm a woman and come into them, they're no longer single sex. So it's
a problem in all those spaces. But the two really high profile situations where it matters
are sport and prisons. Now, I think there are things that are more important than sport.
But sport is just so visible. And also, you know, when I talk about how men commit most crimes
and commit most sex crimes, men get cross, they say not all men. And they hear this is a criticism
of men. And that's why I say men are great. I'm married to one, I have two sons, I have five
brothers, they're all fantastic. Those are my friends are men. They just don't belong in women
only spaces. And the fact is that most people commit crimes, physical crimes, violent sexual
crimes, they're men. So we need to keep them out all of them. But men get pissed off when you say
that. What they don't get pissed off when you say is men are bigger and stronger and faster,
because that is also true. And so we have single sex sports in order that exceptional women can
be recognized and compete. Quite non exceptional men can defeat all women. There's a site called
boysvwomen.com if I remember correctly. And it compares the performance of under 18
American boys with world record holder women. Wow. And in pretty much every athletic
sport of any sort. So not equestrian basically is almost the only exception. American under 18 boys
defeat the world record holder Olympic winner woman. And often it's thousands of boys do it
every year. So, you know, you're, those boys are good, like obviously they're at national
standard in the US, which is very big country, very good sports. But they're not exceptional,
they're not the world's best. So if you compete, if you allow men and women to compete in the same
competitions, there won't be any professional women, there won't be any women who win. And you'll
have women ranking, you know, I mean, if you're in a club like a running club, you might be able
to imagine that the person who you might think of as actually something you might go to the Olympics
for your country. If that's a woman, when she was running as a man, she might be a decent second rank
small club runner. And running isn't even one of the things biggest difference and running it's
about 10 to 12% in weightlifting is 50% or more. And if you have weight in matched sizes, so if
you say the person is the same weight, a woman of the same physical body weight as a man will
lift 30% less at the top ranks. So that's why we have different sports. And if you allow men to
identify as women, you get just immediate absurdities. So Laurel Hubbard, who is a New Zealander, a man
who had been a relatively decent weightlifter in his youth, injured his shoulder incredibly
badly some years ago, like, you know, really just showed his elbow nearly off, you know,
he went to the Olympics in Tokyo for New Zealand, which has a joint team with the Pacific Islands.
And it's one of the sports that Pacific Islanders do very well in his weightlifting because they
were particular body type. And so the world's best women do tend to come from there. And so he
displaced a woman from the Pacific Islands, an 18 year old girl to go on to be on the team. And the
other two went from the same area. He didn't get placed, but there was a young woman from a
poor country who had survived domestic violence as it happened for a child who missed out her one
and only chance probably of going to the Olympics and presenting her country. Because a man who
was in his 40s who had suffered a career ending, nearly injury, who really wasn't very good as a
man, like he wasn't even lifting a national level in New Zealand went instead. So that just shows
you the incredible difference that there is between men and women and the things it's very
visible, like Laurel Hubbard doesn't look like a woman. Of course he doesn't look like a woman,
he's not a woman. And he's standing there as this rather out of shape man on a podium in a local
competition. And there's these girls who are two of the world's strongest women on either side
in second per place. So sport gets there because men get it, they don't feel like attacking them.
It's so visible. So absurd, so absurd. We are living in the age of the absurd, I feel like.
I sort of feel like we went into a parallel universe sometime around 2015 and I wish we
could get out of it again. Like, I used to do sensible things. I used to talk about actual
genuine policy problems. Like this isn't a real policy problem. Like if the first person, the first
man who ever said, I feel like I'm a woman and I want to compete in women's sports have been told,
no, no, no again. No, because it's so stupid, don't be ridiculous, go and compete with your
own sex. And we had never started, it would all have been fine. But now all of us are having to
work so hard to regain ground that should never have been lost. And again, these are just the
high profile examples. I'm very sorry for those girls from the Pacific Island. At least they're
not locked up with a rapist, which is happening in women's prisons right now.
That is horrific, the fact that a man who has a criminal record can just say, I feel like a woman
and, you know, heaven is moved just so he can be transferred into a woman's prison
to be put with women who he then rapes. And I understand that there is a man who identifies
as a woman, he was transferred into a women's prison, and he got two women pregnant by raping
them. And well, I mean, who knows whether it was consensual, but I mean, what does consensual
mean in prison? Like they can't get away from him, you know? Like these are very vulnerable
women. I mean, people often don't know this if they haven't ever looked at it. I mean, I often say
that the place that you see sex differences most clearly is obviously in the labor ward.
But the second place behind that where you see sex differences most clearly is in crime or in prison.
So I know the figures for the UK and I did look up the figures for the US and they're not massively
different. I mean, you imprison a whole lot more people than we do. But as a share of men and women,
what I'm saying for the UK holds roughly for the US. So about 7% of people who get admitted to
prison every year in this country are women and 93% are men. Now the women overwhelmingly commit
nonviolent crimes and get short sentences. So at any given time, about 4% of prison are women.
And the rest are men. Of the women, I think it's about 4% again have committed any sort of violent
crime. Of the men, it's it's God, it's 20% or 40%. I now can't remember which. Of the women,
it's less than 100 committed sexual crime and overwhelmingly that's non contact crimes. So
terrible things like helping to create child porn. But it's not things that make you physically
dangerous to the other people in prison with you. Of the men, it's 19% committed sexual crimes and
they were violent crimes and mostly against women. So you've got thousands and thousands of men
in men's prisons, who are there because they committed violent crimes against women,
and 100 women who committed nonviolent crimes, not against the sort of people who are locked up at
all. So you just need a few of those men to identify as women. And I mean, the incentive is high,
like if you're going to get transferred and you're a rapist. And then on top of that, you remember
that almost no rapes are even reported. Like plausibly at most one rape in 100 even gets as
far as a trial, let alone a conviction. So if you look at the men who were in prison, to have proven
that, you know, they are willing to do anti social and illegal things, a lot of them are going to be
rapists, but not actually in there for rape. Like they raped somebody and nobody knows. So even if
you say I'll keep the rapists out, if you transfer any men, there's a good chance you're transferring
a rapist, or you're going to transfer somebody who hasn't raped yet, but given the opportunity,
he will. And then the last thing that's worth saying about people who are in prison is that the
women are nearly people who have been victimized and far worse than the crime they committed
themselves. So most women who were in prison have experienced at least one domestic violence, sexual
crime, child abuse, and they've been in coercive relationships with men, like often all of those
things. And they are deeply vulnerable people, you know, they often obviously they're also criminals,
so they can be nightmares as well as very vulnerable people. But they are they're very,
very, very vulnerable people, they find a presence of men often very triggering. And then you've got
these men of whom literally at any one time, you know, cut out, I don't know, 20,000 of them
already committed a serious sexual crime against a woman and a whole load more
use their fists to solve problems. And that's who you think you can transfer into women's prisons.
Insane. Insane. And wicked. It's actually wicked. It's worse than insane.
I agree. I agree. There's something really sinister about this movement and
these policies that, you know, trans activists are pushing. And I hope I hope that people
come away from this conversation with a little bit more understanding about the ideology that's
being pushed. I hope they understand that you and I are in no way homophobic, we're in no way
against people living good lives. But we want to be connected to reality. We cannot keep distorting
reality in order to appease some fringe minority that's very aggressive and uncomfortable to deal
with. And that is difficult. People are facing this in all sorts of fields, you know, in their
workplace and all sorts of places. But I think having the facts is important. And I think remembering
that there is such a thing as objective reality. And we need to keep ourselves oriented to it.
Because if we don't, it could be very, very dangerous.
And even if people think like, you know, what's the harm in a bit of delusion? I mean,
I don't think I think there's a lot of harm in delusion, actually. But even if you are someone
who thinks that one of the trans activists slogans is be kind, they think that people like me are
very unkind. Well, listen to what I said about what they're doing to children. And listen to what I
said about what they're doing to deeply vulnerable women in prison, moving rapists and potential
rapists and unknown rapists, very violent, and ask yourself what's kind. It isn't kind to go along
with an ideology that causes so much harm, and that causes so much harm to very vulnerable people.
And that ends up with gay kids thinking that they're meant to be the opposite sex and therefore
getting sterilized. Like that's a human rights abuse at a major scale, major medical scandal.
It's not none of this is kind. So I know that I sound unkind to people who desperately want
reality to not be as it is. But when you lie to people about what's real, you end up being deeply,
deeply unkind. I agree. I agree. And I look at it in the sense of if I'm dealing with a child,
sometimes you need to be a little unkind to the child to keep them safe. And that's okay. In the
long run, that is the kind thing to do. So it's not kind to duck the difficult conversation. It's
very unkind. Like if a child says to you, you know, I want to eat ice cream for every meal,
deeply unkind to let them do it. And this is so much more serious. The harms are so much worse.
Absolutely. Absolutely. Helen, where can people find your work?
So I have a website that HelenJoyce.com. And I also tweet more than I probably should at Joyce
Gender. And anyone who wants to look at the Critic Magazine website, I have a column there. It's a
month magazine here in the UK. And but basically, if you search for me, you'll find me. And I've
done a lot of podcast interviews by this time. And you know what? I always learn from them. So
thank you for the concepts that you raised in this conversation. But if people want to listen
to more, I do have a list on my own website. But anyway, you just search for me. Wonderful. Wonderful.
I really recommend people check out your book. I think it really sheds a lot of light and clarity
on this topic. And I just want to say thank you for all the work you are doing because it takes
a lot of bravery. And I really, really respect that. Thank you very much.